# Enhancing Intrusion Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks Using a GSWO-CatBoost Approach
\abstract{Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) rely 
heavily on effective feature selection (FS) for enhanced efficacy. This study proposes a 
novel approach called Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization (GSWO) to address the 
limitations of conventional methods. GSWO combines a genetic algorithm (GA) and whale 
optimization algorithms (WOA) modified by applying a new three-population division 
strategy with a proposed conditional inherited choice (CIC) to overcome premature 
convergence in WOA. The proposed approach achieves a balance between exploration and 
exploitation and enhances global search abilities. Additionally, the CatBoost model is 
employed for classification, effectively handling categorical data with complex patterns. A 
new technique for fine-tuning CatBoost's hyperparameters is introduced, using effective 
quantization and the GSWO strategy. Extensive experimentation on various datasets 
demonstrates the superiority of GSWO-CatBoost, achieving higher accuracy rates on the  
WSN-DS, WSNBFSF, NSL-KDD, and CICIDS2017 datasets than the existing approaches. 
The comprehensive evaluations highlight the real-time applicability and accuracy of the 
proposed method across diverse data sources, including specialized WSN datasets and 
established benchmarks. Specifically,  our GSWO-CatBoost method has an inference time 
nearly 100 times faster than deep learning methods while achieving high accuracy rates of 
99.65\%, 99.99\%, 99.76\%, and 99.74\% for WSN-DS, WSNBFSF, NSL-KDD, and 
CICIDS2017,~respectively.}

## Genetic Sacrificial Whale Optimization Algorithm.
![GSWO](https://github.com/thuannguyen25032k/Enhancing-Intrusion-Detection-in-Wireless-Sensor-Networks-Using-a-GSWO-CatBoost-Approach/assets/110898043/825be09c-5269-41e0-83f3-f436b49a293e)
